I got an email a couple of weeks ago
asking how to get started making stuff
online if you are starting from scratch
if you have zero followers zero
subscribers zero anything how'd you get
an audience how do you get popular on
the internet the first time I tried to
answer that question it was more than 10
years ago YouTube didn't even exist back
then and I thought I knew it all but I
didn't and I probably still don't but
with another decade and a million
subscribers under my belt since then I
can at least tell you the rules that
I've worked by for the last 15 years or
so not just for YouTube but for anywhere
online the short answer is you just make
stuff the wrong answer well the best way
to tell that does not start an
incredibly rainy Scottish island it
starts down in London
but
ah
I've been making stuff for the internet
pretty much all my adult life I had a
few decent hits when I was younger
viral webpages and games and short
videos that were passed on through email
in the days before social media but
those were one-off bolts from the blue
there were nothing if you base any sort
of career on when I was 19
the British government mail the leaflet
out to every home in the country and it
was called preparing for emergencies and
it gave some pretty obvious advice on
what to do in the event of a disaster
there was a lot of cynicism about that
leaflet and while the intentions were
good
it was mostly seen as a waste of the
taxpayers money the government also put
up preparing for emergencies go view kay
they've got to read ship preparing for
emergencies Co got UK so I bought the
domain copied their website changed all
the text we really sarcastic send it off
to a few friends and went to bed that
sort of joke is still new and exciting
in 2004 I'll be honest it hasn't aged
well since then this was before social
media way before smart phones Facebook
had only just got its first round of
investment and was only open to a few US
colleges but that joke was being
forwarded by email from person to person
to person because that's how it worked
back then and feedback that I was
getting was by email anyway when I woke
up the morning after okay I was a
student so it's probably afternoon after
but I had some emails from friends
saying that's quite funny never had some
messages from people I didn't know
saying that's quite funny and then there
were some messages from people whose
email dresses ended in UK saying that's
quite funny it's it's doing the rounds
of the civil servants and then there was
a message from someone in the government
department responsible for the original
leaflet saying take it down I said no
and it turns out that while mocking the
government is a reasonable good guy
mocking the government and then having
the government not find it funny that is
a really good gag it's Tim hunters we
can get away with it that takedown
request meant that the news got
interested and this went all over the
country as in national newspapers and
local television coverage and it was
just a quick joke that I'd put together
an hour or so because well because the
alternative was not doing it
preparing for emergencies was the first
demonstration I had of a principal that
I now know and that I've worked with for
years
that the chances of a project succeeding
aren't really coupled to how much time
after the money you've spent on it make
it often seem like the opposite is true
you will see people complain that the
thing that they have poured all their
heart and soul and effort and time into
that things sank but something quick and
dirty that they slapped together has
become popular and maybe that's true
maybe that is how it works sometimes but
I would bet that like me
anyone with that complaint has made
loads and loads of quick and dirty
things and most of those will have
failed it's just that they didn't care
as much about those quick and dirty
things they just don't remember them as
much compared to that one big project if
you spend ten dollars and one hour on an
idea it is likely to fail but if you
spend a million dollars and a year on an
idea it is still likely to fail there's
no advantage called sturgeons law 90% of
everything is crap and I realized that
isn't what Theodore sturgeon actually
said it's been cut down a bit over the
years but the idea holds sturgeon was a
science fiction author and his reply to
the idea that 90% of science fiction is
crap was yes it is but only because the
90% of everything that's crap most
things fail and sure something that
spent months being polished might have a
slightly better chance of survival but
the odds are still against you instead
of polishing you could spend those
months shoving out ten or twenty or a
hundred ideas of each one of those
projects a new roll of the dice and each
one of those projects is something that
you learn from something that helps make
the next roll of the dice just a little
more likely to succeed of course this is
all assuming that your definition of
success involves being popular or
getting paid for it these days I know
that I could probably make a lot more
money and save a lot of effort if I just
stood in front of a green screen and
monologues are about incredible facts
about cartoon series you won't believe
or ancient mysteries they don't want you
to know about but then I wouldn't be
traveling so much I wouldn't be having
so much fun and maybe I wouldn't have
kept going through rough times there are
other definitions of success that aren't
just about the numbers more than a
decade ago I came up with this graph
across the bottom is effort and across
the side is awesome this is still the
guiding principle that I use to
determine whether I'm going to do a
project or not and sure what I consider
effort and awesome have changed
over the years both in definition and in
scale awesome doesn't have to mean money
or view count it can mean getting to do
something really cool or working with
someone who you admire you define your
own success
anyway naive me at 19 thought there was
a chance had done straight from
preparing for emergencies for a
full-time job making weird stuff for a
living
there wasn't any chance of that
obviously in hindsight because the
people looking at the site weren't going
oh he's good
they were going oh that's good there was
no reason to stick around no reason to
do the 2004 equivalent to clicking the
subscribe button which was clicking the
subscribe button just add an RSS feed to
your reader I miss RSS anyway I got lots
of lovely emails about preparing for
emergencies I made a couple of contacts
from it but that was all I only taken
the first step up the ladder and I had
no idea how long that ladder would be so
I kept making stuff but back then I was
missing a piece of the puzzle and two
really important piece but I explained
that I need to start heading north
[Music]